---
layout: post
---
Working from a great coffee shop in Lafayette today. Starting off the day reading through the asynchronous programming chapter in Eloquent Javascript. I feel fairly confident in what async functions are and how they work, but I want to read through this chapter to solidify any loose thinking in regards to that.

### Chapter 11 Async - Eloquent Javascript
The author has a sense of humor. We will be learning the ins and outs of async by writing networking functions for a fictitious crow colony that has learned how to use javascript and communicate from nest to nest by sending signals to and from each other.... interesting.

#### Callbacks
One approach to async programming is to make functions that perform a slow action take a callback argument to run when the code is finished working. (We learned about this in the NodeJS course we are currently working through.) As we learned previously, this can get convoluted quickly when wanting to perform more than one async operation. The example below has two callbacks. Any more and this could lead to hard to lots of nesting and hard to read code. IE.
```Javascript
import {bigOak} from "./crow-tech";

bigOak.readStorage("food caches", caches => { // first callback
  let firstCache = caches[0];
  bigOak.readStorage(firstCache, info => { // second nested callback
    console.log(info);
  });
});
```
<!--more-->

#### Promises
Here is where promises come in and are very handy! A Promise is an object that represents a future event and is used in place of a callback.

> A promise is an asynchronous action that may complete at some point and produce a value. It is able to notify anyone who is interested when its value is available.

The easiest way to call a promise is to call ```Promise.resolve```. This function will ensure the value you give it will be wrapped in a promise that immediately finishes with the value you gave it as its result.
```javascript
let promiseFive = Promise.resolve(5);
promiseFive.then(value => console.log(`Got ${value}`))
// Got 5
```
To get the result of the promise, you call the ```.then``` method with a callback. This will register that callback to run when the promise is resolved. and produces a value.<br/> <br/>
**Something I didnt know:**
You can call ```.then``` multiple times on a single promise, and they will be called, even if you add them after the promise has already resolved (finished).
```Javascript
let promiseWait = new Promise((resolve,reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    resolve(5)
  },10000)
})

promiseWait.then(val => console.log(`got ${val + 5}`))
// after 10 seconds
// got 10

promiseWait.then(val => console.log(`got ${val + 10}`))
// no waiting since promise is resolved with 5
// got 15
```
This seems valuable to me because you can get data and store it in a variable as a promise. Once that promise resolves, you can use that same data on multiple other functions or calculations.

If you use the return statement in a ```.then``` method, it will return another promise resolved with whatever functions or calculations you performed on it, or, if whatever you manipulate it with returns a promise, it returns a promise, waits for that to be resolved, and then resolves to its result.
```Javascript
let promiseWait = new Promise((resolve,reject) => {
  setTimeout(()=>{
    resolve(15)
  },10000)
}).then(value => {
    console.log(`Value = ${value} from first promise`)
    return new Promise((resolve,reject) => {
      setTimeout(() => {
        resolve(value+5)
      },5000)
    })
}).then(newVal => console.log(`Value = ${newVal} from second promise`))

// After 10 seconds
// Value = 15 from first promise
// After 5 More seconds
// Value = 20 from second promise
```
I like the following description from the book:
> It is useful to think of promises as a device to move values into an asynchronous reality. A normal value is simply there. A promised value is a value that might already be there or might appear at some point in the future. Computations defined in terms of promises act on such wrapped values and are executed asynchronously as the values become available.

#### Failure
Async programs need a failure option to check for any errors caused during the callback processes. With the callback method this is difficult and results in more lines of code and if/else statements to be used.

With Promises though this becomes a great deal easier. They can either be resolved, or rejected. If resolved, the result is passed to the next ```.then``` method. If rejected however, all ```.then``` methods are ignored after the failure, and the promise will jump to the ```.catch``` method to handle the error. ```.catch``` Is very mich like ```.then``` in that it returns a new promise which resolves to the original promises value if it resolves normally, otherwise it resolves to the value of the ```.catch``` handler.

As a shorthand, ```.then``` also accepts a rejection handler as a second argument, alongside the resolve function, which it can use to reject the new promise. Here is an example from the book of what a chain can look like.
```Javascript
new Promise((_, reject) => reject(new Error("Fail")))
  .then(value => console.log("Handler 1"))
  .catch(reason => {
    console.log("Caught failure " + reason);
    return "nothing";
  })
  .then(value => console.log("Handler 2", value));
// → Caught failure Error: Fail
// → Handler 2 nothing
```
What happens here is the promise immediately rejects, passing over the ```.then``` method and sending the ```.catch``` method an ```Error("Fail")```. The ```.catch``` method logs this and its reason to the console and returns a value string of "Nothing". When something is returned from a ```.catch``` or ```.then``` method, it is returned as a promise. Since this promise is resolved with the str of 'nothing' the next ```.then``` method can handle it. It then logs 'Handler 2' + the resolved promise value of 'nothing' to the console.

Javascript can also detect when errors are not handled. If a promise is rejected without a call to ```.catch``` javascript will throw an error to the console.

#### Importance of exception handling
It is also important to handle exceptions with Promises. What if the network is down, and our resolve or reject doesnt return anything? What if a function name was typed or misspelled? We should handle this issue with a ```try / catch``` statement.
```Javascript
promiseErrorTest = () => { return new Promise((resolve,reject) => {
  let rndm = Math.floor(Math.random()*100)
  setTimeout(() => {
    if (rndm > 50) {
      resolve('Resolved Promise')
    } else {
      reject(new Error('Rejected!'))
    }
  }, 5000)
})}

tryPromise = () => {
  try {
    promiseErrorTest().then(val=>console.log(val),
                            rejection=>console.log(rejection))
  } catch (e) {
    console.log(`Failure: ${e}`)
  }
}

tryPromise()
// wait 5 seconds then randomly resolve or rejects
// 'Resolved Promise' or 'Error: Rejected!'

// What if we misspelled promiseErrorTest in the tryPromise function?
// The catch (e) part of the try catch statement will CATCH this issue and return
// Failure: ReferenceError: promiseErrorTet is not defined
```

#### Collections of Promises
When working with a collection of Promises running at the same time, the ```Promise.all``` function is very useful. It returns a promise that waits for all of the promises in an array to resolve and then resolves to an array of the values produced. If any promise is rejected, the result of Promise.all is itself rejected. Lets test this out. First, lets create a fake promise.
```Javascript
let fakePromise = (val) => {
  return new Promise((resolve,reject) => {
    setTimeout(()=>{
      let rndm = Math.floor(Math.random()*10)
      if (rndm % 2 == 0) {
        resolve(val)
      }
      reject('Promise Didnt Work')
    },3000)
  })
}
```
Then, lets create a ```Promise.all``` call using a couple of the fake promises.
```Javascript
Promise.all([
  fakePromise(1),
  fakePromise(2),
  fakePromise(3)
]).then(results => console.log(results))

// uncaught exception: Promise Didnt Work
```
Hmm. So it seems that the Promise.all ONLY returns when every single proimise is fulfilled. Although cool, it seems a little useless if we want to know what failed and what didnt. To help we can attach a catch statement to each fakePromise() call like so:
```Javascript
Promise.all([
  fakePromise(1).catch(e => e),
  fakePromise(2).catch(e => e),
  fakePromise(3).catch(e => e)
]).then(results => console.log(results))

// Array(3) [ 1, "Promise Didnt Work", 3 ]
```
I feel like I would want to know what promises worked and which ones didnt if I were calling Promise.all() on a list of promises. I could then use this information to decide what to do next in a program.

I kept playing with this a little and wanted to write something that would filter through the returned array for only promises that were resolved. Here is something I came up with. Not sure if this is correct, but it does work.
```Javascript
Promise.all([
  fakePromise(1).then(
  (val)=> {return {resolved: true, val}},
  (e) => {return {resolved: false, error: e}}
  ),
  fakePromise(2).then(
    (val)=> {return {resolved: true, val}},
    (e) => {return {resolved: false, error: e}}
  ),
  fakePromise(3).then(
    (val)=> {return {resolved: true, val}},
    (e) => {return {resolved: false, error: e}}),
]).then(results => console.log(results.filter(promise => {return promise.resolved})))

// Promise { <state>: "pending" }

// [
// {resolved: true, val: 1 },
// {resolved: true, val: 2}
// ]
```

After these sections the book got a little lofty and used some examples that really threw me off course. This has happened every now and again in this book but I still enjoy it.

#### Async / Await
Javascript allows us to use pseudo synchronous code to describe asynchronous functions. An ```async``` function is a function that implicitly returns a promise and that can, in its body, await other promises in a way that looks synchronous. An ```async``` function is marked by the word async before the function keyword. Methods can also be made async by writing ```async``` before their name.

Inside of an async function you can use the word ```await``` in front of an expression to wait for a promise to resolve before moving onto the next line of code. Mimicking the functionality of a synchronous function, while remaining asynchronous.

For basic code, is is smart to use ```async/await``` with promises as it leads to an easier to read and understand code.
```Javascript
var asyncExample = async () => {
  try {
    let fakeValue1 = await fakePromise(1);
        console.log(fakeValue1)
  } catch (e) {
      console.log(e)
}

// if promise fulfills --> 1
// if it fails --> 'Promise Didnt Work'
```

For simple stuff, this seems a lot easier to read than using lots of .then and .catch statements. The ease of putting what you want to try to do in a try/catch is easier to understand in my opinion.

#### Generators

It is here the author also introduces Javascript's Generator functions. We looked at something similar, the 'Iterator' back in chapter 6, but the Generator is much more straightforward and easy to digest. To make a function a Generator you add * to the function declaration like so. Each time the ```.next()``` method is called on the function, it runs through its code until it hits ```yield``` Here is an example [from mdn website](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Iterators_and_Generators#Generator_functions):
```javascript
function* makeRangeIterator(start = 0, end = 100, step = 1) {
    for (let i = start; i < end; i += step) {
        yield i;
    }
}

let example = makeRangeIterator(1,10,1)

example.next() // {value: 1, done: false}
example.next() // {valie: 2, done: false}
```
Once yield is no longer reached, done is set to false and value will always be undefined.

#### The Event Loop
Back to promises...

Asynchronous behavior happens on it's own empty callback. Promises always resolve or reject as a new event on the async event stack.
```JavaScript
Promise.resolve("Done").then(console.log);
console.log("Me first!");
// → Me first!
// → Done
```

### Summary

Whew! What a chapter. I'm glad I read through it and worked through a lot of the examples in chromes dev tools. This really solidified how Promises work. Especially Promise.all().
